Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
With this show, we're beginning a look at the fascinating writing career of science fiction author Charles Harness.
Born and raised in Texas, Harness completed his university in law studies in Washington, D.C.
From 1946 to 1953, Harness produced 13 short stories and two novels. One of the novels, The Rose, is a classic.
Harness completed law school in 1946, so in those years, he was striving to establish a career as a patent lawyer and to support his family.
Right, and it was the financial strain confronting his young family that encouraged Harness to write science fiction.
I was working in Washington as a mineral economist during the war and going to law school.
My daughter was born in 1946 and there were some bills to be paid. We needed the money, so I sat down and wrote my first science fiction story, which was time travel.
And this was bought by what was then a standing. And I thought, well gee, do they pay money for this stuff?
So I thought, perhaps I should turn out some more of it, which I did.
So Harness got the writing bug and was able to work full time and to write for a few years.
But he did stop writing in 1953 and he wasn't heard from again until 1966.
Here's what he told us when we asked him about that long gap.
I wrote for a while until my daughter got old enough to demand more and more of my time, so the writing had to come to an end.
And it didn't really resume again until she was ready to go off to college. This was in 1964 and I picked it up again.
Two of these early stories Harness published under the pseudonym Leonard Lockhart.
The second of the two, that professional look, was a joint effort between Harness and Theodore Thomas, another Patton lawyer.
Here Harness describes the genesis of these stories and their eventual course.
At 10 and 9 we were in the Patton Department at Sinomid together.
I wrote the first Leonard Lockhart story, The Unprobable Profession.
And at that time he was writing science articles for the Stanford Advocate, as well as being in the Patton Department at Sinomid.
So I said to him, why don't you and I start this series of stories about a Patton attorney and his problems.
Here's the first one. He said, yeah, we can do that.
So I wrote the first one, you wrote the second one. No, together we wrote the second one. That was half and half.
And after that I left Sinomid and went to Grace and he continued the series.
So number three is an all-subsequence story, or it is, even though the name Leonard Lockhart is still used on him.
Harness's active writing periods were 1946 and 1953, during which he produced 13 short stories and the two novels, Flight Into Yesteryear, also published as a paradox man in The Rose.
1966 and 1968 were six short stories in the novel The Ring of Ritternell.
In 1974, The Present would saw publication of Wolfhead, The Catalyst, Firebird, and The Venetian Court, along with three short stories.
Many of Harness's works feature mystical elements. Apparently this aspect of life has influenced Harness a great deal.
I did go to a ministerial school at TCU at one time. This was long, long ago.
And they threw me out for reasons I won't go into here. But it was a wise decision.
But I've never lost a mystic slant to lots of things.
On our next show, we'll begin to look at Harness's most famous work, The Rose.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon.
1953 marked the publication of a little-known science fiction classic. Charles Harness's short novel entitled The Rose.
And we have to say little known because of the curious history of the book.
Right. First of all, Harness attempted to sell a book in the United States markets, but the editors were unwilling to buy it.
He then had to sell it in England to a relatively obscure magazine, Authentic Science Fiction.
My agent at the time, Forest Akerman of, I think, Los Angeles, paddled it around here and there.
Nobody in this country would buy it. It went to John Camel, and he wrote a nice two-line letter bug. He just couldn't use it.
It wasn't the kind of thing that any science fiction magazine or fantasy and science fiction magazine was publishing at the time.
And I should have known better for writing it. But I wanted to write it, so I did.
And finally, Akerman sold it to this little authentic magazine in England, and they published it.
Authentic was under the editorship of H.J. Campbell when The Rose was published.
Publication of The Rose is considered to be the capstone achievement in the generally mediocre 85 issue run of the magazine.
It would have languished in the pages of Authentic were it not for the fact that the British critics absolutely loved it.
Arthur Clark, Judith Merrill, Brian Aldis, and in particular Michael Morkock praised it.
It was through the almost single-handed efforts of Morkock that The Rose was published in book form, again in England, some years later.
Arthur Clark saw it, got the Morkock for it.
And Morkock, who was getting them through the editableness over there at that time, asked to have his people, Compact Books, publish it.
And we haven't had a contract for it, and they did publish it.
Then it was picked up fairly quickly by two other British outfits in hardcover form.
And of course they had to pad it out with the two other stories to make it in a book size.
The two short stories added to pad the length of the volume in which The Rose was finally published are The New Reality and The Chess Players.
The New Reality, written in 1950 and first published in Thrilling Wonder Stories, is considered to be Harness Finest short story.
The Chess Players is a clever little story based on the trouble it develops when a chess club encounters a chess-playing rat.
In fact, many of Harness's works allude to chess. We ask him if he enjoys the game.
It wasn't until 1969 that The Rose was made available in the United States, thanks to the efforts of Damon Knight.
Berkeley published it then, and so far that has been the only American edition.
It struck us that one reason The Rose could not find a United States publisher in 1953 was that American readers simply were not ready for a book heavy on the metaphysical rather than the hardware.
We ask Harness if he might agree.
Everybody was guided pretty much by the Dean of Science Fiction, John Camel, and he was a hardware man.
And everything had to obey the laws of physics or it would be unacceptable.
More about The Rose on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Rose on our next show.
Stay with us.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
On our last show we talked with science fiction author Charles Harness about his classic short novel, The Rose.
We learned how The Rose was enthusiastically embraced by the British critics, yet it wasn't published in the United States until 16 years had elapsed from its initial publication in an obscure British magazine.
In this show we'll look at some of the literary aspects of The Rose.
Many of Harness's earlier works were written hastily, but we hasten to add not clumsily.
The Rose, on the other hand, required a considerable length of time for completion.
That was one of the stories where I didn't know how it was going to come out.
And in fact, I worked on that one for two years, Bill. This is not a two-month slide.
I read all the books on the arts in the Stanford Public Library. This is one year.
I took notes on them for an entire two-week vacation one year.
And then it gradually began to come together.
And I used, of course, as you've seen in the story, Oscar Wilde's story of the Nightingale and the Rose, which I'd read many years before and I was quite impressed by it.
Harness also filled us in on some other details about the writing of the Rose.
For instance, its early incarnations were longer and it originally had another name.
Let me give you a little bit more history on this.
There was a time when the Rose was in a longer form and it had the name not the Rose, but invitation.
It was an intergalactic thing where the Earth was being examined to see whether it would be admitted into a galactic relevant.
And it didn't have the ending that it now has.
Damon Knight liked that, but he couldn't get his publishers to accept it.
This again was a year or so before it came out and it's in authentic and it's short form.
So at that point I said, maybe I'm going to shorten this thing down, give it a different ending.
So I did.
I cut it from 45,000 words down to, I think it's about 30,000.
And it's Ackerman, Dan was able to spell it, he's authentic in England.
The central theme of the Rose is difficult to capsule.
It's a love story involving two central characters, Rui Jacques and Anne of Antal.
It's set in the midst of a future confrontation between science and art.
And it describes a transcendental evolution of man into Superman.
Harness and his brother Billy, who as we should learn in a later show, died when Harness was still in high school, were the models for the central characters.
Rui Jacques again resembles my brother a great deal.
And if you can visualize that guy with his sarcasm, his biting wit, his contempt for all, all the, well, I don't know.
But he was a, he had a high personal integrity and a impatience with convention and so on.
At least in his head he did.
And I wanted to get him into print.
And of course Anne of Antal is me, although I had to take on a female form to make it effective.
I would have, at one time I would have been pleased to die if it would bring him back, but of course that would just be the story.
But it was a thought and it was a psychic force driving the story.
Do yourself a favor, find a copy of the rose in your local used bookstore and read it.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
In 1968, Berkeley published Charles Harness' novel, The Ring of Ritternell, his first work to appear in 15 years.
It's the story of two brothers, one a lawyer, the other a poet, in a far distant future.
He or Harness, who is himself a lawyer, tells us about the very personal inspiration for the poet.
My brother Billy was several years older than I, in fact he was nine years older than I.
And he died when I was just about to graduate from high school.
He had tumors of the brain, which in those days were inoperable.
Today they don't, it wouldn't be too much trouble to operate if they couldn't do it then.
So I have remembered him and I have never let him go.
And he has done in several of my stories The Ring of Ritternell.
He was the brother who was destroyed by the chief bad guy, but his brain was retained.
He was the poet.
His name was Omer.
In 1977, Wolfhead, Harness' fourth novel came out.
It was his first novel in nine years.
Wolfhead describes a post-atomic holocaust America and the struggle between various cultures that populate the desolate land.
Harness told us that when he wrote Wolfhead, he went against the conventional wisdom that one shouldn't write about certain subjects.
I started out writing it. I thought I would do a thing which is ground upon.
You're not supposed to write post-atomic novels.
It's really unacceptable.
But here seem to be a good one.
A real life character, Richard Nixon, inspired Harness' characterization of the malevolent leader of the underworld.
Well, I thought, see, here's this guy. He's about to take over the country.
Anything he does is okay just because he says so.
And I'm going to have a character like that in Wolfhead.
So I put him in there. He was the president of the underworld.
And he would come out and rule the upper world, except he didn't.
Even the wolf of the title was inspired by a real life dog.
The wolf was modeled at the time on an Alaskan Husky dog that lived next door to us.
And she and I were great friends, so I thought I'd put her in it.
When Harness reminisced about Wolfhead, he told us he was pretty much pleased by it.
It's one of my happier efforts. It's not really serious.
Well, some of it is. You know, at one time it had a different ending.
Of course, we had to ask Harness about that different ending.
Keep in mind that during his writing career, he was a full-time patent attorney.
The answer to this question provides an interesting insight into other ways the real world can intrude into fiction.
And I have to cough when I think about it. Excuse me while I cough.
This is a psychological cough.
In the original ending, the girl lived.
But I got involved in some chemical litigation that I lost.
And I was so angry and so disappointed, I said, somebody has to die.
So I killed the heroine and wrote some poetry for her benefit so she wouldn't feel too badly about it.
And that's the poetry, of course, is in the front and in the back.
So that's a little sidelight on that.
We'll have more with Charles Harness on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Science fiction author Charles Harness began writing in earnest again in the late 70s,
and he produced three novels in short order.
The Catalyst is the story of a patent lawyer who works for a chemical company.
In this respect, it resembles some short stories Harness wrote a decade earlier,
the Alchemist and an ornament to his profession.
The Catalyst actually started out as a longer mainstream novel, but Harness, unable to sell it,
fixed it up as a science fiction work.
His brother figured heavily in this book, too.
This is a story of a man who was in the first department.
And one of the stories there involved a peculiar whistle,
which was derived from cheap, may safely graze by Johann Sebastian Bach.
But that long version never sold, and I thought,
well, I'm not going to let it die.
I will convert it to a science fiction work with all the proper trappings
and things you need to call it science fiction, which I did.
In 1981, Harness published a novel that was sort of a throwback to his early period,
Galaxy Galloping Days.
Firebird is made up of early Harness devices, such as a time loop and the rebirth of the cosmos.
Here, Harness tells us about the basis for the story in Firebird.
I'm sure you recognize the basic story here.
This is Tristan and his shoulder.
I don't know whether you go in for Wagner or not,
but it is his shoulder and Tristan drinking what she thinks is the poison drink,
but it's his lovely lecture again, and they fall in love.
And after that, just about everything parallels the Tristan and his shoulder story
as you would find it in Wagner's opera, including Death of the Man and the Flight.
Editor David Hartwell of Pocket Books also influenced Harness's approach to this novel.
In the beginning, when I first wrote David Hartwell of Pocket Books,
I should mention he is a medieval scholar.
This is what he got his PhD in English in.
And he was quite familiar with the Tristan legend from there,
and he found Welsh origins for it, and he had me change the names to look like Welsh names.
And he said, make him more of a Renaissance knight,
and I put in some chaff, which is easy enough.
So, there's something that looked like a chaff thing.
I worked it into the plot, and it came out okay.
But it is a never-content, no-for-nothing contribution.
Harness is retired from his lifelong profession of being a patent attorney.
He's recently produced a couple of short stories in a novel, and more are in the works.
He's a gentleman who, while working full-time, produced a small body of quality science fiction.
We asked him how he wishes to be remembered.
My request there is, please forget me, let me sink into oblivion,
let the waves wash up over the sand, and everything disappears.
Honest to God.
We somehow doubt that Mr. Harness will be forgotten.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show